>> MORNING GUYS, ANYBODY NEED
MEDICAL ATTENTION?
>> Reporter: ON A MONDAY
MORNING, JUSTIN PHILLIPS SETS
OUT WITH A SMALL MEDICAL TEAM TO
OFFER AID TO HAWAII'S HOMELESS.
>> WHAT'S UP?
YOU CAN ALWAYS CALL ME.
I'LL TRY TO HELP IF I CAN.
>> Reporter: PHILLIPS DIRECTS
OUTREACH FOR THE INSTITUTE FOR
HUMAN SERVICES, THE STATE'S
LARGEST HOMELESS SERVICES
PROVIDER.
HIS FIRST STOP-- A SIDEWALK
ENCAMPMENT STRETCHING TWO BLOCKS
NEAR DOWNTOWN HONOLULU.
PHILLIPS KNOWS WHAT IT'S LIKE TO
SLEEP ON THESE STREETS.
ABOUT A DECADE AGO, HE STRUGGLED
WITH ADDICTION AND WAS HOMELESS
TOO.
>> I COME OUT HERE WITH AN
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT IT MEANS
TO BE HOMELESS.
I COME OUT HERE WITH AN
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT IT MEANS
TO BE A DRUG ADDICT.
I COME OUT HERE WITH AN
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT IT MEANS
TO BE AN ALCOHOLIC.
AND BECAUSE I HAVE THAT
UNDERSTANDING, I'M ABLE TO
RELATE TO PEOPLE IN A DIFFERENT
WAY.
>> LOOKING FOR AMY.
>> Reporter: AT A PARK DOWNTOWN,
PHILLIPS AND HIS TEAM FIND A
WOMAN THEY KNOW WELL.
>> HEY AMY!
>> HOW MUCH YOU HAD TO DRINK
TODAY?
>> Reporter: THERE ARE AROUND
7,200 HOMELESS IN THIS STATE OF
1.4 MILLION PEOPLE.
>> HAWAII IS KNOWN AS A
BEAUTIFUL ISLAND PARADISE.
BUT IT ALSO HAS THE DISTINCTION
OF HAVING ONE OF THE HIGHEST
PER-CAPITA RATE OF HOMELESSNESS
IN THE NATION.
>> Reporter: ACCORDING TO THE
MOST RECENT STATISTICS, HAWAII'S
HOMELESSNESS RATE IS NOW AROUND
505 HOMELESS FOR EVERY 100,000
RESIDENTS.
BY COMPARISON, NEW YORK STATE
HAD 436 PER 100,000, AND
CALIFORNIA, 302.
HAWAII'S PROBLEM BECAME SO
SEVERE, THAT TWO YEARS AGO
GOVERNOR DAVID IGE DECLARED A
STATE OF EMERGENCY.
>> THIS HOMELESSNESS CHALLENGE
IS A CRISIS.
>> Reporter: THAT RELEASED MORE
FUNDING FOR NEW HOUSING AND
SHELTERS LIKE THIS ONE--
DESIGNED SPECIFICALLY FOR
FAMILIES WITH CHILDREN.
>> WE HAVE A VERY TIGHT HOUSING
MARKET HERE.
>> Reporter: STATE HOMELESSNESS
COORDINATOR SCOTT MORISHIGE SAYS
HAWAII'S HIGH COST OF HOUSING IS
THE NUMBER ONE CAUSE OF THE
PROBLEM.
AVERAGE RENT FOR A ONE-BEDROOM
APARTMENT HERE IS ALMOST $1,800
A MONTH.
AND HAWAII RANKS NUMBER ONE OF
THE 50 STATES IN HIGHEST OVERALL
COST OF LIVING.
>> WE REALLY HAVE A SHORTAGE OF
AFFORDABLE HOUSING, AND
PARTICULARLY RENTAL HOUSING.
PART OF IT IS BECAUSE WE'RE AN
ISLAND STATE, SO WE HAVE VERY
LIMITED LAND.
AND THERE'S NOT AS MUCH
OPPORTUNITY FOR ADDITIONAL
DEVELOPMENT.
>> Reporter: TWO-THIRDS OF
HAWAII'S HOMELESS LIVE ON THE
ISLAND OF OAHU, THE MOST
POPULOUS OF THE STATE'S EIGHT
ISLANDS AND HOME TO THE CAPITAL,
HONOLULU.
NATIVE HAWAIIANS AND PACIFIC
ISLANDERS WHO'VE MIGRATED FROM
PLACES LIKE THE MARSHALL ISLANDS
AND MICRONESIA MAKE UP A QUARTER
OF HAWAII'S POPULATION, BUT
ACCOUNT FOR 40% OF THE HOMELESS.
>> HI CHARLES!
CAN I TAKE A PEEK AT YOUR LEGS?
>> Reporter: THE MEDICAL
OUTREACH TEAM INCLUDES HEATHER
WAHAB, A REGISTERED NURSE.
SKIN WOUNDS FROM LIVING OUTDOORS
ARE A COMMON PROBLEM.
>> THEY HURT?
>> Reporter: THESE HOMELESS
INDIVIDUALS REPRESENT SOME OF
THE MOST DIFFICULT, CHRONIC
CASES.
MOST ALL OF THEM HAVE UNTREATED
PHYSICAL AND MENTAL HEALTH
ISSUES.
>> ROSIE!
>> Reporter: PSYCHIATRIST CHAD
KOYANAGI ASSESSES MENTAL ILLNESS
AND ADDICTIONS.
>> YOU HAVE DEPRESSION, BIPOLAR,
PSYCHOSIS?
>> YES.
DEPRESSION AND BIPOLAR.
>> ARE YOU DEPRESSED NOW?
>> YES I AM.
>> ARE YOU HEARING VOICES?
>> I'M HURTING BAD.
I HAVE NOTHING TO HELP ME.
>> Reporter: HOMELESS SERVICE
PROVIDER JUSTIN PHILLIPS SAYS IN
ORDER FOR A HOMELESS PERSON TO
QUALIFY FOR CERTAIN HOUSING
PROGRAMS, A DOCTOR MUST DIAGNOSE
A DISABILITY.
BUT PHILLIPS SAYS MANY OF THE
PEOPLE OUT HERE CAN'T BE RELIED
ON TO MAKE IT TO AN APPOINTMENT.
>> WE KNOW THEY'RE NOT GONNA GO
TO A DOCTOR, YOU KNOW?
"MY MAIN PRIORITY IS GETTING A
BEER IN MY SYSTEM, MAYBE SOME,
YOU KNOW, MARIJUANA, MAYBE SOME
ICE.
WANNA GET LOADED, GET GOOD AND--
YOU KNOW, GOOD AND HIGH.
AND THEN I'M READY TO GO DO IT."
BUT BY THAT TIME, IT'S 5 P.M.,
ALL THE DOCTORS ARE CLOSED, ALL
THE DOCTORS' OFFICES ARE CLOSED,
THERE'S NO PSYCHIATRISTS.
>> Reporter: WHEN HONOLULU'S
HOMELESS DO SEEK OUT CARE, IT'S
USUALLY AT THE QUEEN'S MEDICAL
CENTER, A PRIVATE NONPROFIT
HOSPITAL THAT HANDLES MORE THAN
10,000 VISITS A YEAR.
DANIEL CHENG IS THE E.R. MEDICAL
DIRECTOR.
>> THE TOP FEW DIAGNOSES THAT WE
SEE ARE INFECTIOUS DISEASE,
BEHAVIORAL HEALTH, AND SUBSTANCE
ABUSE.
>> Reporter: MANY OF CHENG'S
HOMELESS PATIENTS ALSO SUFFER
FROM HEART DISEASE, DIABETES,
AND KIDNEY DISEASE, AND LACK
ACCESS TO REGULAR MEDICAL CARE.
>> OUR HOMELESS INDIVIDUALS DIE
ABOUT ONE-THIRD EARLIER THAN THE
NORMAL POPULATION.
SO WE'RE TALKING A GOOD SOLID 20
TO 25 YEARS LOST OF LIFE.
AND THAT REALLY STRIKES HOME.
BECAUSE I THINK THAT SPEAKS TO
THE FRUSTRATION AS A PHYSICIAN.
AT THE VERY CORE OF WHAT WE'RE
TRYING TO DO IS QUALITY OF LIFE.
>> Reporter: THE HOMELESS BURDEN
CHENG'S HOSPITAL WITH AROUND
$10 MILLION A YEAR IN
UNREIMBURSED MEDICAL BILLS.
THEY ALSO BURDEN MEDICAID, THE
GOVERNMENT HEALTH INSURANCE
SYSTEM FOR THE POOR.
ABOUT 50% OF MEDICAID FUNDS ARE
SPENT ON SO-CALLED HIGH-
UTILIZERS, PEOPLE LIKE THE
HOMELESS WHO FREQUENTLY VISIT
THE E.R.
>> Reporter: CHENG SAYS HE SEES
THE SAME HOMELESS PATIENTS OVER
AND OVER.
>> WE JUST DON'T HAVE ENOUGH
TIME AND RESOURCES TO ADDRESS
THE SOCIAL ISSUES.
AND THEY GO BACK OUT TO THE
STREET AND THEY GET LOST INTO
THE SYSTEM.
AND IT'S A VERY PERVERSE AND
IT'S A VERY BROKEN SYSTEM.
>> Reporter: TO CHANGE THAT,
CHENG HAS STARTED A PROGRAM TO
PUT SOCIAL WORKERS IN THE E.R.
TO CONNECT THE HOMELESS TO FOOD
STAMPS, HOUSING AND OTHER
SERVICES, BEFORE THEY'RE
DISCHARGED AND HARD TO LOCATE
AGAIN.
THE HOSPITAL IS ALSO PARTNERING
WITH JUSTIN PHILLIPS' INSTITUTE
FOR HUMAN SERVICES TO OPEN HOMES
LIKE THIS ONE, WHERE THE
SERIOUSLY ILL HOMELESS CAN HEAL
WITHOUT TAKING UP A MORE
EXPENSIVE HOSPITAL BED.
>> WE ARE SPENDING $3 TRILLION A
YEAR ON HEALTH CARE.
>> Reporter: ADDRESSING
HOMELESSNESS IS A TOP PRIORITY
FOR HAWAII STATE SENATOR JOSH
GREEN.
GREEN IS ALSO A PRACTICING ER
DOCTOR AND IS PUSHING A MORE
RADICAL IDEA.
HE INTRODUCED A BILL SAYING
HOMELESSNESS SHOULD BE
CONSIDERED A MEDICAL CONDITION,
AND DOCTORS SHOULD BE ABLE TO
PRESCRIBE HOUSING.
>> THE MOMENT YOU HAVE SOMEONE
IN HOUSING, YOU DECREASE ALL OF
THE COMPLICATIONS THEY HAVE FROM
ALL THEIR OTHER DISEASES.
>> Reporter: GREEN SAYS MEDICAID
SHOULD COVER RENT FOR THE
HOMELESS.
HE CITES A UNIVERSITY OF HAWAII
STUDY SHOWING THAT AFTER THE
HOMELESS WERE GIVEN HOUSING,
THEIR MEDICAL COSTS DECREASED BY
43%.
>> WE'RE ALREADY SPENDING THESE
MEDICAID RESOURCES ON OUR
INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE REALLY
HURTING.
AND WE'RE SPENDING IT VERY
INEFFICIENTLY.
IF THEY GET ADMITTED TO THE
HOSPITAL FOR A DAY, IT'S $4,000.
IF THEY GO 100 TIMES IN THE
YEAR, WHICH IS VERY COMMON
ACROSS HAWAII AND ACROSS THE
COUNTRY, THEY MAY SPEND $200,000
OR $300,000 OF TAXPAYER MONEY.
>> Reporter: GREEN'S PROPOSAL
HAS GAINED NATIONAL MEDIA
ATTENTION.
BUT IT HASN'T PASSED THE HAWAII
STATE LEGISLATURE.
IN THE MEANTIME HE'S WORKING
WITH LOCAL HEALTH INSURERS TO
PILOT THE IDEA.
>> HAWAII'S NOT NECESSARILY
WAITING FOR LEGISLATION TO GO
THROUGH.
>> Reporter: STATE HOMELESSNESS
COORDINATOR SCOTT MORISHIGE SAYS
EVEN WITHOUT GREEN'S BILL, THE
STATE WILL SEEK PERMISSION FROM
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT TO SPEND
MEDICAID DOLLARS ON HELPING
PEOPLE FIND AND STAY IN HOUSING.
SIMILAR IDEAS HAVE BEEN LOOKED
AT IN NEW YORK AND CALIFORNIA.
IN THE MEANTIME, THE STATE AND
CITY HAVE BEEN INVESTING IN A
PROGRAM CALLED HOUSING FIRST,
WHICH PROPONENTS SAY HAS STARTED
TO MAKE A BIG DIFFERENCE.
THE IDEA, WHICH HAS HAD SUCCESS
IN OTHER STATES, IS TO GET A
HOMELESS PERSON INTO HOUSING
BEFORE DOING ANYTHING ELSE.
>> BECAUSE WE KNOW THE QUICKER
YOU CAN GET SOMEONE INTO HOUSING
AND A POINT OF STABILITY, THE
MORE POSITIVE IMPACT YOU WILL
HAVE FOR THAT PERSON.
>> Reporter: AND THAT INCLUDES
POSITIVE IMPACTS ON A PERSON'S
HEALTH.
>> COME ON IN.
>> Reporter: HOUSING FIRST IS
HOW THOMAS LAMBERTON, HOMELESS
FOR EIGHT YEARS, GOT INTO HIS
APARTMENT ABOUT TWO YEARS AGO.
>> THIS IS THE PICTURE OF
CARDBOARD THAT I SLEPT ON AND MY
BACKPACK I USED FOR A PILLOW.
>> Reporter: AS AN ALCOHOLIC
LIVING ON THE STREETS OF
HONOLULU, LAMBERTON HAD REGULAR
SEIZURES.
DID YOU GO TO THE EMERGENCY ROOM
WHEN YOU WERE ON THE STREETS?
>> EVERY OTHER WEEK AT LEAST.
WELL, IT WAS CONSTANT.
IT'S EMBARRASSING WHEN NURSES
KNOW YOUR FIRST NAME.' ¡
HEY THOMAS.'
IT'S LIKE, ' ¡WHOA.'
THIS IS MY BEDROOM, AND MY
BATHROOM, WITH A SHOWER.
>> Reporter: THEN, A LOCAL
NONPROFIT GOT LAMBERTON ON A
LIST FOR A HOUSING FIRST
APARTMENT.
>> I MEAN, I'M NOT DRINKING.
THAT'S FIRST OF ALL.
AND YOU KNOW, WHEN YOU'RE NOT
DRINKING, YOU'RE GONNA BE
HEALTHIER.
AND I HAVE A PLACE TO PUT FOOD
IN THE REFRIGERATOR.
>> Reporter: SINCE HE MOVED IN,
LAMBERTON HAS ALSO STOPPED
HAVING SEIZURES.
HE'S ON MEDICAID AND SEES A
PRIMARY CARE DOCTOR.
AND HE'S BEEN TO THE EMERGENCY
ROOM ONLY TWICE, FOR MINOR
INJURIES HE GOT VOLUNTEERING AT
THE HUMANE SOCIETY.
>> MY HEALTH IS GREAT NOW,
BECAUSE I DON'T HAVE THE
RASPBERRY PATCHES ON MY HIPS AND
SHOULDERS FROM SLEEPING ON
CONCRETE OR CARDBOARD.
>> Reporter: BUT LAMBERTON SAYS
HIS NEW HOME HAS RESTORED MORE
THAN JUST HIS HEALTH.
>> IT GAVE ME MY SELF-RESPECT
BACK THAT I-- DON'T FEEL LIKE A
PIECE OF SCUM ON THE STREET AND-
- WORTHLESS TO SOCIETY.
BASICALLY THEY'VE HELPED ME OUT
IMMENSELY.
AND I OWE THEM MY LIFE.
>> Reporter: OVER THE LAST TWO
YEARS, THE STATE AND HONOLULU
HAVE EXPANDED HOUSING FIRST BY
ADDING 400 NEW HOUSING UNITS -
LIKE THIS NEW BUILDING, OPENED
LAST MONTH.
MORE THAN 500 HUNDRED PEOPLE
WILL BE HOUSED BY THE END OF
THIS YEAR.
ADVOCATES SAY HOUSING FIRST HAS
HELPED FINALLY TURN THE TIDE.
>> OUR HOMELESS NUMBERS HAVE
DECREASED STATEWIDE.
>> Reporter: LAST MONTH, HAWAII
ANNOUNCED THE FIRST DECREASE IN
ITS HOMELESS POPULATION IN EIGHT
YEARS.
DOWN 9% BETWEEN 2016 AND 2017.
THEY'RE HOPING IMPROVEMENTS IN
HEALTH AND MEDICAL SPENDING WILL
NOW FOLLOW.
>> YOU OK?
>> Reporter: BACK ON THE
STREETS, JUSTIN PHILLIPS SAYS
HOUSING PEOPLE IS THE ULTIMATE
GOAL HERE, TOO.
>> YOU EVER THOUGHT ABOUT COMING
DOWN TO THE SHELTER AND HOOKING
UP WITH A SOCIAL WORKER?
>> Reporter: GAINING TRUST TO
GET PEOPLE HEALTHY.
AND INTO A HOME.
>> WE'VE HOUSED A LOT OF PEOPLE
THAT NORMALLY WOULDN'T GET SEEN
BY DOCTORS, WOULD NEVER GET
HOUSING.
WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO HOUSE THEM
THROUGH THIS PROCESS.' ¡
HOPE, ONE BANDAGE AT A TIME,'
YOU KNOW, BECAUSE THAT'S WHAT--
REALLY, WHAT WE'RE DOING, YOU
KNOW?
ONE RELATIONSHIP THROUGH ONE
BANDAGE, YOU KNOW.